Analysis 

Barchart wild animals academic popularity vs wild animals welfare 

When visualizing this bar chart, one can notice that some animals such as the Anser Anser (Greylag Goose) and the Ovis Aries (Sheep) are extremely popular in the academic field. The Anser Anser, the one with the highest academic popularity, appears in almost 1400 articles and the Ovis Aries, with the second highest popularity, appears in approximately 1100. However, for the Sheep this is likely due to being a livestock animal. They both have relatively moderate welfare values: Anser Anser has a welfare of 30.79 and Ovis Aries of 27.02. On the other hand,  species with an extremely low welfare such as the Cottus sp. (Freshwater Sculpins) with the lowest welfare of 13.88 and the Turdus Torquatus (Ring Ouzel)  with the second lowest welfare of 14.39, lack academic popularity. Cottus sp. only appears in approximately 50 articles and Turdus Torquatus does not appear in any. This clearly exemplifies that there is an important discordance between the welfare of an animal and the scientific focus upon it. Species with a low welfare should clearly have a higher academic popularity than species with a higher welfare, but that seems to not be the case. Our aim is to bring attention to those species with lower welfare that lack and desperately need scientific attention in order to improve their welfare. 


Barchart under/over representation of wild animals

From this bar chart, it seems clear that there is an overwhelming underrepresentation of wild animal species in academic research. Only 4 out of our 86 species are overrepresented, with the remaining 81 being underrepresented. Further, 12 of these 81 are underrepresented by more than 40%, showing a very stark lack of focus upon these species given their welfare. Of the overrepresented species, only 2 are overrepresented by more than 10%. 

All 11 species of ray-finned fish are underrepresented, which reflects the general reduced focus upon fish in a welfare context and 7 of the 12 most underrepresented are fish. Organisations in the animal welfare sector such as the Humane League UK and the Fish Welfare Initiative have only more recently begun their attempts to improve the welfare of fish, showing this to be a neglected issue. Similarly, all 5 reptile species, 30 out of 31 bird species and all but 3 mammal species are underrepresented. From this, we would suggest an increased focus on studying the lives, physiology and environment of the following species, who are the most underrepresented with respect to their welfare.




Analysis of the Map

Most of the animals in our sample are located in North America, East coast of Africa and Europe. Generally speaking, those whose habitats are in Africa have an average welfare higher than in the other continents, enjoying a comparatively better welfare with higher index values.  Animals living in North America experience worse situations compared with their European counterparts. The species with the lowest welfare (13.88), the freshwater sculpins, is located in Canada. Nevertheless,  species with the best welfare, such as the yellow-bellied marmots (63.21),  equally live in North America. Apart from the species in the aforementioned three continents, the animals living in Asia and Australia have a medium level of welfare, generally the same as those in Europe. What’s more to mention is that species belonging to mammalia (mammals) have the best welfare around the world, while actinopterygii (ray finned fishes) suffer the most. 



Analysis of the Boxplots

Analysis for boxplot: The boxplot shows that among all four classes, mammalia enjoys the best welfare with the highest average welfare index value while actinopterygii experiences the worst situation. Aves ranks the second followed by Reptilia. As for the distribution of welfare within the species, mammalia possesses the widest range incorporating the two species with highest and second highest welfare index in our sample. At the same time, reptilia has the narrowest range, which may be caused by the limited sample size. 

Written by Aashish, Lucia and Ocean
