Sorana Bucseneanu: Context and Researcher

Hi! I'm Sorana and I am a second-year student, majoring in Language & Culture! My interests lie in the interdisciplinary aspect of my degree and I am passionate 
about the intersection of culture, sociology, and psychology. I hope to one day merge my interests in the humanities and science in my future career.

Aashish Khimasia: Context and Data Analysist

Hi! I'm Aashish and I'm a second year Arts and Sciences student studying Neuroscience, Psychology and Philosophy. What interests me most is the nature of consciousness, and what 
the moral significance of sentience is. I hope to develop a specialisation in philosophy of mind and cognitive science, with a skill set including data analysis. 

Lucia Dominguez: Context and Researcher

Hello, I'm Lucia, a second year Arts and Sciences student majoring in Societies and minoring in Health and Environment.
Throughout my life I have lived in six different countries, making me a very open-minded, sociable and international person, conscious of my sourroundings. 
My interests include sustainability, global development, sociology as well as psychology. I hope to one day participate in and NGO that strives to collaborate directly with disadvantaged communities and minorities, combining all my passions.

Shi Li: Data visualization and Data Analysist

Hi! I'm Jason, a second-year Arts and Science student majoring in science and engineering. The field I would like to explore is an intersection of economics, 
mathematics and data science. The interdisciplinarity of the BASc degree helps me to analyse questions using various qualitative and quantitative methods, which 
could also be applied in our project.

Jimghai He: Data visualization and Data Analysist

Hi! I'm Ocean, majoring financial economics and minoring computer science. My main interest is machine learning algorithms and their applications especially in financial fields.
Besides, I would also like to explore and research interesting phenomenon from a statistical perspective.
