WHAT: 

Aim: What do we want to accomplish? 

Our main goal is to estimate, as accurately as possible, the welfare of approximately 90 wild animal species, on a global scale, and then place on a map these different species, comparing the welfare of wild animals between different countries. After doing a specific case study contratsing two countries' policies on wild animal welfare, one with a high wild animal welfare and another with a low wild animal welfare, we will attempt to suggest ways of initiatives that are succesful in order to increase wild animal welfare. By doing this, we wish to help shed light on the species which require 
more human and environmental intervention, research, as well as help direct policy efforts to where they are most needed and identify the causes of poor welfare. 

HOW:

Objectives: How are we doing this? 

Animal welfare is an emerging field, therefore the research surrounding it is still in its early stages. That means that there are a number of key uncertainties that 
our research project needs to take into careful consideration and address:

How can we accurately quantify the wellbeing of a wild animal?

The way we have estimated the welfare of animals, as precisely as possible, is by producing an accurate and well-informed function. (TALK ABOUT ETHICAL/PHILOSOPHICAL POV TAKEN INTO CONSIDERATION TO WEIGHT EACH VARIABLE)

This function takes into account 
key variables, such as:

-the type of death (total harvest, vehicle accidents, poisoning, fence entanglement, predation, disease, starvation, drowning)
-mortality rate
-life expectancy
-welfare expectancy 
-maximum lifespan and
-reproduction rate.

Each of these variables are considered on a scale from 0 to 100, by weighing up various positive and negative experiences. 

What is the welfare value of a wild animal?

The estimated welfare value for each wild animal, the output of our function, is considered on a scale from 0 to 100, where 0 represents a very poor quality of life, 
and 100 represents a very positive one. 

Which species should we be focusing our resources and attention on?

In order to intelligibly draw attention to which species have more negative experiences and require intervention, we have produced various visualizations that allow 
comparison of different animal species’ welfare against each other. Moreover, we have also compared the academic popularity of each species with their welfare value, 
in order to highlight which species researchers and conservationists should be focusing more on. 








