Analysis 

Barchart popularity vs welfare 

Barchart under/over representation of wild animals


From this bar chart, it seems clear that there is an overwhelming underrepresentation of wild animal species in academic research. Only 4 out of our 86 species are overrepresented, with the remaining 81 being underrepresented. Further, 12 of these 81 are underrepresented by more than 40%, showing a very stark lack of focus upon these species given their welfare. Of the overrepresented species, only 2 are overrepresented by more than 10%. 

All 11 species of ray-finned fish are underrepresented, which reflects the general reduced focus upon fish in a welfare context and 7 of the 12 most underrepresented are fish. Organisations in the animal welfare sector such as the Humane League UK and the Fish Welfare Initiative have only more recently begun their attempts to improve the welfare of fish, showing this to be a neglected issue. Similarly, all 5 reptile species, 30 out of 31 bird species and all but 3 mammal species are underrepresented. From this, we would suggest an increased focus on studying the lives, physiology and environment of the following species, who are the most underrepresented with respect to their welfare.

Analysis of the Map

Analysis for map: Most of the animals in our sample are located in central America, east coast of Africa and Eroupe. Generally speaking, those whose habitats are in Africa enjoy comparatively better welfare with higher index values.  Animals living in America experience worse situations compared with their European counterparts, though  species with the best welfare, yellow-bellied marmots,  live in central America.  Apart from the species in the aforementioned three continents, the animals living in Asian and Australia own a medium level welfare generally the same as those in Europe. What’s more to mention is that species belonging to mammalia have the best welfare around the world, while actinopterygii suffers the most. 

Analysis of the Boxplots

Analysis for boxplot: The boxplot shows that among all four classes, mammalia enjoys the best welfare with the highest average welfare index value while actinopterygii experiences the worst situation. Aves ranks the second followed by Reptilia. As for the distribution of welfare within the species, mammalia possesses the widest range incorporating the two species with highest and second highest welfare index in our sample. At the same time, reptilia has the narrowest range, which may be caused by the limited sample size. 
