Background and Context (1st draft)

Our motivation for focusing our research project on the wellbeing of wild animals stems from the discrepancy that we have found between the policies 
countries have on the protection of the welfare of wild animals. An article published in the Global Policy journal at Durham University, emphasizes that 
although the wellbeing of animals is a matter that should be addressed globally, policies that  are supposed to protect these animals are largely sparse and
differ greatly from country to country. This article, along with the interactive map provided by the World Animal Protection Index, which ranks countries 
around the world based on their animal welfare policy and legislation, indicate visible dissimilarities between different countries’ legislations. 
Therefore, by quantifying the wellbeing of wild animals, we are hoping to help bring attention to the countries that require a change of policies and species 
that are in need of intervention.

In order to reach our goal, we decided that we would need to quantify the wellbeing of wild animals and come up with a function that would be able to calculate 
the welfare value of each one. To accomplish this, we found appropriate data that provides crucial information on the location, mortality rate, types of death, 
life expectancy, maximum lifespan, welfare expectancy, the relative welfare expectancy, as well as reproduction rates of each species (COMADRE and COMPADRE databases.) 
To produce a function that is as precise as possible and to weigh each variable in an accurate manner, we looked into the existing research in order to gain a better understanding 
of the animals’ experience and perception of pain and pleasure. 

Firstly, the premise that animals are sentient beings that are capable of experiencing emotions, such as pleasure, joy, pain, or fear, is a driving force in 
our research. As a study conducted by the researchers Helen S. Proctor, Gemma Carder, and Amelia Cornish, titled “Searching for Animal Sentience: A Systematic 
Review of the Scientific Literature” suggests, a proper comprehension of animal sentience is vital to the understanding of animal welfare. In spite of existing 
research that clearly proves the existence of animal sentience, there are many controversies that still surround this topic, which ultimately impact the welfare of animals in a 
negative way. It is the disregard of animal sentience that drives people to treat animals in inhumane ways for profit, entertainment, or with the purpose of 
altering an ecosystem, for example by harvesting. 

This notion that animals are sentient beings capable of emotions is backed up by multiple studies. One such study, called “The Dying Animal,” indicates  
that it is not only humans who have an awareness of death: animals have that ability as well and their responses to death are strikingly similar to humans’ 
responses. For example, zoologist Iain Douglas-Hamilton believes that elephants are aware of death, and the American wildlife researcher and conservationist 
Cynthia Moss notices that they would “gather around the body of a dead herd member, gently touching the body with their trunks and feet, often standing vigil for days.” 
This awareness that animals are shown to have when it comes to death is pivotal in our understanding of welfare, as researchers claim that animals experience natural 
death and violent death inflicted upon them by humans differently.  Moreover, animals that witness the killing of offspring or companions also suffer from psychological distress, 
such as increased heart rate, PTSD, and blood pressure. 

Another important aspect that we have taken into consideration is the concept of “chronesthesia,” a capacity to mentally time travel, that according to research, 
some animal species lack. Bernard Rollin, a professor of philosophy and biomedical sciences at Colorado State University, explains that “if animals live only in the 
moment, then when they experience pain, they are their pain. Their entire world is pain, without mitigating knowledge that sometime in the future the pain may end.” 

The understanding of animals’ sentience and experiences that these studies provide is crucial in producing a well-informed function. To read about how we weighed each variable, click here. (-> methodology)


