Case Study: Canada


By looking at the thirteen species with the lowest welfare value, we found that six are located in Canada, including the animal with the lowest welfare (the Freshwater Sculpins - welfare value: 13.88). Therefore, this case study seeks to analyse the laws, policy and actions of wildlife organisations regarding animal welfare in Canada, to be able to recommend changes to this to improve animal welfare in Canada.

We will use the World Animal Protection Index, which assesses countries according to 10 indicators, grouped into 4 goals,  addressing key animal welfare issues found around the world. By employing this index we wish to understand and highlight the policies that are implemented there and what kind of changes would therefore need to be made in order to improve the welfare of animals. 


1. Recognition of animal sentience 

The Recognition of Animal Sentience legislation, passed in 2015, states that “animals are not things but rather sentient beings with biological bills”, with the word “animal” encompassing “all domestic animals, wild animals, including fish [...]”. Even so, this law excludes many species and according to the World Animal Protection Index, “all species should be included in Quebec’s Act to Improve the Situation of Animals,” since animal sentience has been backed up by science as well. 


2. Presence of animal welfare legislation 

On protecting the welfare of wild animals 

According to the World Animal Protection Index, there is no information on non-captive wild animals in Canada’s Criminal Code. Although thanks to the three main legislations: the Canada Wildlife Act, the Wild Animals and Plant Protection and Regulation of International and Interprovincial Trade Act and the Species at Risk Act there is legislation in place that protects certain species of wild animals. These do not concern each individual animal’s welfare beyond the prohibition of cruelty in the Criminal Code. Moreover, the government has resisted implementing international protection measures like the European Union ban on the leghold trap and the European Union import ban on seal products. Additionally, fur farming remains a threat to the welfare of wild animals in Canada and action should therefore be taken to ban this activity at a federal level. 


3. Establishment of supportive government bodies

Government accountability for animal welfare

Regarding government accountability for animal welfare, there is no designated body responsible for creating policy that would benefit the welfare of animals. Rather, the government relies solely on implementation and regulation at the provincial level. Therefore, it might be useful for the government to implement legislation at a national level, cooperating with provincial governments to improve animal welfare protection. It is considered that the government should provide “more resources to support the creation and training of dedicated public bodies to enforce animal cruelty laws,” as well as “a working group specifically dedicated to animal welfare could be constituted at the national level, working in cooperation with provincial governments.” (World Animal Protection Index)


4. Support for international welfare standards (?)

OIE animal welfare standards 

The principles of the OIE (currently the World Organization for Animal Health) are: freedom from hunger, malnutrition and thirst, freedom from fear and distress, freedom from heat stress or physical discomfort, freedom from pain, injury and disease and freedom to express normal patterns of behaviour. In Canada, however, the legislation does not rely on the OIE standards when it comes to animals used for scientific research. 


Canada and Fish Welfare

Six of the 12 species with the lowest welfare are different species of ray-finned fish in Canada. Canada’s fishing regulations make a strong effort to protect certain species of fish, specifically salmon and lake trout, with a salmon licence required to fish for salmon in many regions. There has been an effort to limit the fishing of all other species, by requiring a fishing permit to fish for any species in a selected number of national parks. However, there is a clear disparity between the protection of salmon and other species.

The special protection of salmon follows the trend in the attempts to prevent the current decline of Salmon in the North Pacific environment, since salmon are the food source of many wild predators and human livelihoods. This reflects an approach to animal protection based upon the impacts of the species beyond itself, upon humans and other animals, rather than based upon the welfare of that animal.


Animal Sentience and Fish 

Canada’s legislation recognises several features of animal sentience, particularly in relation to pain, suffering and distress. Further, it recognises suffering as distinct from physical pain, being a mental phenomenon rather than a physiological state, in all animals and birds, including fish. The Animal Welfare and Safety Act in Quebec (2015) additionally rules that ‘A person may not, by an act or omission, cause an animal to be in distress.’ However, though the animal welfare policy surrounding domesticated animals appears to be grounded in the notion that animals are sentient, the permissions and protections for hunting, fishing as well as the use of animals for a range of commercial purposes suggests this sentiment is not extended to wild animals. Further, animals are recognised as being able to suffer, however not that they are aware. The addition of this dimension into law would likely cause a greater shift in the mindset regarding wild animal welfare, given their awareness of events and occurrences being acknowledged. 



Canadian Wildlife Charities:

The Wilderness Committee focuses campaigns upon protecting wildlife in Canada. Their campaigns currently seek to help grizzly bears, caribou, wild salmon, spotted owls and killer whales. Although the case for the protection of these animals is strong, the drive for this is partly driven by the impact and proximity of these to humans ‘imagine your world without…’. Further, they campaign for laws to protect all threatened, endangered and special concern species. However, we found that all the lowest welfare species in Canada from our map, had an IUCN endangerment index of Least Concern or Not Evaluated, meaning they would not come onto the radar of the Wilderness Committee, despite it being estimated that they have the lowest quality lives of the species we considered.

Therefore, we would suggest such organisations considering species which are not at most risk of extinction and which are not as beloved and well-known by society, but whose lives contain more suffering.

Wildlife Preservation Canada (WPC) aims to save the animal species that are most at risk from extinction and that require human intervention. The species they are working on protecting are mammals, birds, insects, as well as amphibians and reptiles, however, we noticed that fish are not included in the organization’s three categories they are using to classify the level of endangerment of different species. We would suggest that they also direct their attention and support toward fish, considering their low welfare.

The Canadian Wildlife Federation also directs its efforts upon the species which are most at risk of being lost in Canada, including 700 species of plants and animals with the aim to assist conservation efforts. They also focus upon helping fish to overcome barriers to migration through rivers, which are caused by a range of human and natural events and improve their welfare. They acknowledge Canada’s 200 freshwater fish species, of which ⅓ are endangered. However, they also recognise the role of recreational fishing in the Canadian economy, contributing $8 billion annually, leaving this as a reason for their focus upon maintaining rivers, lakes and the animals within them. We would suggest that they also consider the impact of recreational fishing; regarding the welfare of fish and the environment.

