Conclusion

Altogether, after calculating the welfare of 86 species and visualizing our results, we can clearly conclude that most of the species that we have analyzed - (82/86 species, so 95.3% of them) - are underrepresented, meaning that the number of academic papers in research journals that were published is low when compared to their welfare value. From our findings, the ray-finned fish species is distinctly the one that concerns us the most, as 7 out of the 13 most underrepresented species are from this class and 6 of these also find themselves in the 13 species that have the lowest welfare. As we can see from the case study we did on Canada, the country that showed a significantly lower welfare value, animal welfare can be enhanced by  improving existing legislation, introducing new policies, adhering to international welfare standards and encouraging charities to take data-driven action. 

However, our findings must be considered alongside the limitations of our project. With a limited number of variables upon which to base our function, and several assumptions that reduce the accuracy and specificity of it, our findings should not be taken as a conclusive and indisputable judgement of the welfare of wild animals and the position they hold in academic and environmental contexts. They should instead be read as a set of judgements based upon a particular philosophical position, confined by assumptions that may be disputed. 

We encourage others to develop their own models of wild animal welfare, with judgements based upon a different set of criteria and with a focus upon the policy of different regions, to compare and contrast the findings and create a debate about the best methodologies and approaches to take to estimating welfare and analysing policy, to come up with better solutions. 


Call to Action

From our project we have come to recognise some areas which need to be changed to allow for more accurate and comprehensive investigations regarding wild animal welfare in the future.
More data - The amount of data regarding wild animal welfare was very limited, with most datasets we came cross being limited to a handful of species already popular with environmental groups
More preliminary projects - More projects like ours that seek to estimate wild animal welfare would lead to debates about areas of contention that need to be debated, to allow for future iterations to be more accurate and better considered and thus can far more reliably point to solutions
More awareness - Our background research and analyses showed that the discussion of welfare in conservation and environmental organisations is limited, and that wild animal welfare is something that is not yet a common area of knowledge and debate amongst animal welfare and animal rights activists. Bringing the issue of wild animal suffering to light, communicating the scale of the problem, is important to trigger increased discussion and attention placed upon the plight of wild animals.
